---
layout: post
title: "You are never an expert in data science"
excerpt: "Don't teach yourself data science in 10 days, but in 10 years"
date: 2021-05-25
tags:
    - meta
comments: true
---


I'm so glad that data science is not the "hottest" job anymore. 
Thank you blockchain and cryptocurrencies!

In the past couple of years, we've seen hundreds, if not thousands, of training academies prop up in the ed tech space claiming to teach you data science in 21 days / 3 months / 6 months. Because of the high demand from students and beginner data scientists, this business has been booming so far but they've also setup unreal expectations for their students. 

I've been working in this field for about 5 years now, and I would consider myself far from being an expert. But don't take my word for it. Listen to Francois Chollet, the creator of on of the most popular DL libraries, Keras - 

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Besides, I&#39;m not sure that &quot;deep learning experts&quot; exist. People with the highest h-index can&#39;t write a GPU kernel or design a DL ASIC. Nor could they win a Kaggle competition. Nor, for the most part, write reusable code (which is really the core of DL).</p>&mdash; François Chollet (@fchollet) <a href="https://twitter.com/fchollet/status/1386370113809522690?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">April 25, 2021</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script> 


<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Consider that, not long ago, most AI experts knew for a fact that neural networks were a failed avenue. Consider that, in 2013, most of the top names in computer vision were saying that the nascent success of DL might be just a fluke. And remember the debates about local minima?</p>&mdash; François Chollet (@fchollet) <a href="https://twitter.com/fchollet/status/1386370519025340416?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">April 25, 2021</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script> 

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">If someone tells you they&#39;re a top expert, a pioneer, the main thing they&#39;re an expert at is playing status games. The same people will probably also try to demean those they feel are in competition with them, because that&#39;s how status games work.</p>&mdash; François Chollet (@fchollet) <a href="https://twitter.com/fchollet/status/1386371194870398976?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">April 25, 2021</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script> 


Peter Norvig, who works as the Director of Research at Google, wrote a beautiful essay titled [Teach Yourself Programming in 10 Years](https://norvig.com/21-days.html). Data science is no exception.



In 5 years, the tech stack may change and skills may change. Then what ?

I’m not super enthusiastic about Kaggle medals anymore. Could be a case of grapes are sour but I’ve decided to take chill pill.

I came close to solo bronze finish a couple of times only to lose by a few spots.

I find Kaggle learn a really underrated resource on Kaggle. Competitions- maybe I’ll team up and try abs do better. My lessons learnt were that my local cross val was not marching the public leaderboard.

Naval Ravikant says the winners of any game are ones whose marginal utility of playing game is zero or negative yet they keep doing it while others move on. This is something I can relate because I kept worrying about my school grades to an insane limit. That constant need to top the exams went away only after sophomore year at college.

To answer this question, I wanted to understand what are some other activities or moments where I was truly happy that I really enjoy, excluding purely pleasure 
- I remember solving classical mechanics problems from high school physics
- long distance running out in the nature
- swimming alone by myself

What's common in all these activities is the single minded focus on the present moment. In fact, it's a very well established fact from the practise of meditation. When your mind is free of thoughts, it's in pure bliss. But that state is very difficult to acheive. What you can try to do is to try and focus your mind on just 1 thing at a time, and free it from all other distractions. If you're able to acheive this very rare state, you are in what people call "Deep Work" or "programming zen" "in the zone" or "runner's high". It's when you're optimally engages with the problem at hand, you're neither bored, nor anxious. 

And I've found that data science as a feild offers me fair bit of opportunities to explore this state. Ofcourse it happens very rarely. Sometimes, it could be about a clever bit of programming, or sometimes it could be about building on some mathematical model, but it offers enough of an intellectual challenge that can force you to immerse yourself wth the problem at hand. And that's what keeps me going, trying to search for those moments. They may not come every day or every week. You may not even know when it's happening, but once that moment has passed is when you feel very accomplished, fortunate, thrilled / grateful.

As long as I keep finding those moments, I'll be fine with this choice of career. If or when it stops happening, I'll have to figure out what it is now that can push me towards zen 


